
# Data Modeling with Postgres

## **Overview**
We were brought in by Sparkify's analysis team because they needed a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis. Our role was to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. We were able to test the database and ETL pipeline by running queries provided by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare the results with their expected results.
We applied data modeling with Postgres and built an ETL pipeline using Python. We defined fact and dimension tables for a star schema for a particular analytic focus, and wrote an ETL pipeline that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python and SQL.


## **Song Dataset**
Songs dataset is a subset of [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/).

Sample Record :
```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

## **Log Dataset**
Logs dataset is generated by [Event Simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim).

Sample Record :
```
{"artist":"Des'ree","auth":"Logged In", "firstName":"Kaylee", "gender":"F", "itemInSession":1, "lastName":"Summers","length":246.30812,"level":"free","location":"Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale, AZ","method":"PUT","page":"NextSong","registration":1540344794796.0,"sessionId":139,"song":"You Gotta Be","status":200,"ts":1541106106796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Windows NT 6.1; WOW64) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/35.0.1916.153 Safari\/537.36\"","userId":"8"}
```


## Schema

#### Fact Table 
**songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page `NextSong`

```
songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
```

#### Dimension Tables
**users**  - users in the app
```
user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
```
**songs**  - songs in music database
```
song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
```
**artists**  - artists in music database
```
artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
```
**time**  - timestamps of records in  **songplays**  broken down into specific units
```
start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday
```

## Project Template base
```test.ipynb``` -> displays the first few rows of each table to let you check your database.

```create_tables.py``` -> drops and creates your fact and dimension tables. You run this file to reset your tables before each time you run your ETL scripts. Running this file creates **sparkifydb** database.

```etl.ipynb``` -> reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into the tables. This notebook contains detailed instructions on the ETL process for each of the tables. 

```etl.py``` -> reads and processes files from **song_data** and **log_data** and loads them into the tables. 

```sql_queries.py``` -> contains all of the sql queries, and is imported into the last three files above.



## Environment 
Python 3.6 or above

PostgresSQL 9.5 or above

psycopg2 - PostgreSQL database adapter for Python


## How to run

Run ```create_tables.py```  to drop and creates your tables whenever needed. Run ```etl.py```  to read and process a single file from song_data and log_data. Both files can be run as following:

```
python create_tables.py 
python etl.py 
```


 #### Documentation and References: 
[Psycopg](http://initd.org/psycopg/docs/)

[PostgreSQL Documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/)

[Pandas Documentation](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/)

